Guidelines to Maintain Lab Social Cohesiveness & Productivity During the COVID-19 Outbreak

Disclaimer: Any directives from medical professionals, e.g., from campus medical, State Department of Public Health, & US CDC, overrides these guidelines here. Under all scenarios, your first and most important job is to make sure that your personal safety is assured. If you are sick, your main job is to get better — please do not come into the lab! Campus medical has a series of practical steps you can take. Please use common sense.

Team, we’ve seen how the Coronavirus situation can escalate quickly in other industrialized countries. As such, I’ve drafted plans for what to do in the event of a partial and complete campus shutdown. These are uncomfortable conversations to have. We hope it doesn’t come to this; but if it does, we’ll be prepared.

Scenario 1. Partial campus shutdown (partial remote work). Campus remains open, but in-person meetings are minimized, large gatherings are canceled, and people are encouraged to work remotely when possible. We'll begin trialing remote work this week, in preparation for this scenario.

Scenario 2. Complete campus shutdown (mandatory remote work): Campus is closed; all group members work from home. Italy is in this scenario right now. China was there for most of January and February.

In the event of either scenario, after accounting for personal safety, the PVLab leadership team’s job is to get the group functioning as a unit as quickly as possible, albeit remotely. Only after your personal safety is assured, I ask that you turn your attention to the following:

Working remotely involves being *Accessible*, *Integrated*, and *Professional*.

Accessible: Be accessible during fixed working hours daily. Predictability makes you dependable, and reduces anxiety in your colleagues.
Step 1: If you’re working remotely, you are asked to add two items to this Google Doc [LINK]: (i) the fixed hours when you’ll be accessible to your lab mates daily, and (ii) your preferred communication mode (cell, WhatsApp, Slack…) that will guarantee quick turnaround during those hours. People working together on the same project should have overlap. Please discuss hours with your teammates by chat. Please bookmark the GDoc in your browser.
Step 2: [ADMIN] created an “always open” videoconferencing channel, linked below. This is like our “community room.” You can come to meet [ADMIN], or just come to hang out. [ADMIN] will have this channel open during most of their working hours. Please bookmark this channel: [LINK]
To minimize in-lab meetings, let’s use Webex when possible. Option to videoconference into Group Meeting starting this week. We'll use the videoconferencing link above.
Step 3: We will prepare for shutting down the lab this week. [NAME] is in charge of lab shutdown and restart operations, and will discuss their plan with team members at group meeting. During in-lab meetings to shut down the lab, maintain approximately 6 feet (2 meters) distance from others [Ref. 1].

Integrated: Folks working offsite should communicate their daily goals clearly, so other team members know what everyone else's priorities are, enhancing social cohesion and productivity.
Step 4: Snippets goals will be updated daily when working off site, before 10am in your local time zone. This includes the PI.
Step 5: To keep main Slack channels work-focused, we created a new Slack channel called #ubuntu, which will be our new COVID-19 channel. If you’re “quarantining” the news to fixed hours each day (recommended for mental health), you can check this channel once daily.

Professional: Professional mindset at home is *hard*. [PERSON]'s tip is to wash and dress up in working clothes in the morning; go for a 10–15 min walk (maintaining 6 ft distance); then when you arrive at "work," you treat your fixed working hours as you would arriving at the office (minimize distractions).
Thank you for doing your part to make the lab such a great family. We’ll get through this, hang in there. Please continue to shine, and make the world a better place, even in these challenging times.

My virtual door is open for feedback / comments.

References:
[1] https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/risk-assessment.html, accessed 10-March-2020
